Concept: patterns (#209)
exercism/awk: concepts/patterns/about.md

# Introduction

Recall from the Fundamentals concept, an AWK program is composed of **pattern-action pairs**.

```awk
pattern1 { action1 }
pattern2 { action2 }
...
```

## What do we mean by "pattern"?

The "pattern" is any AWK expression.
The truthiness of the expression's result determines if the action is executed.

## The Empty Pattern

The pattern can be omitted.
In this case, the action is performed for every record.

We can print all the usernames in the passwd file.

```sh
awk -F: '{print $1}' /etc/passwd
```

## Regular Expressions

AWK can compare strings against regular expressions to obtain a boolean result.

Use the `~` regex-matching operator to match a particular field. 
This operator takes a string as the left-hand operand and a regular expression as the right-hand operand.

> A regular expression literal is enclosed in `/` slashes.

Reviewer: Do we want to point out that you can also use a regular string here?

Author: Since I'm teasing a future regex concept, no.

To find the user in the passed file who log in with bash:

```sh
awk -F: '$7 ~ /bash/ {print $1}' /etc/passwd
```

`!~` is the "regex does **not** match" operator.

> If you want to match a regex against the whole current record, there's a shorthand syntax for it:
> the `$0 ~ /regex` expression can be simply expressed as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To match a regex against the whole current record, you can do `$0 ~ /regex/`.
As a shorthand for this, you can include only the regex part and this will check the whole current record.
```

> If you want to match a regex against the whole current record, there's a shorthand syntax for it:
> the `$0 ~ /regex` expression can be simply expressed as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To match a regex against the whole current record, you can do `$0 ~ /regex/`.
As a shorthand for this, you can include only the regex part and this will check the whole current record.
```

> This is so common there is a shorthand: you can drop the `$0` and `~` and simply write `/regex/`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is so common there is a shorthand: you can drop the `$0` and `~` and simply write `/regex/`.
```

```sh
awk '/regex/' data.txt
```

~~~~exercism/note
Compare that AWK one-liner with the equivalent grep command

```sh
grep 'regex' data.txt
```

AWK gives you a whole programming language without sacrificing succinctness.
~~~~

> We'll get more into GNU AWK's regular expression flavour in a further concept.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll get more into GNU AWK's regular expression flavor in a further concept.
```

I believe American English is explicitly called out at the dialect of choice for Exercism.

Author: D'eau!
